.\" \" -*- nroff -*-
.\" \" $Id: ipraytime.1 11579 2010-05-06 13:59:19Z thamer $
.\" \" 
.\" \" - Define 'example' macro
.\" .de EX
.\" .ne 5
.\" .if n .sp 1
.\" .if t .sp .5
.\" .nf
.\" .in +.5i
.\" ..
.\" .de EE
.\" .fi
.\" .in -.5i
.\" .if n .sp 1
.\" .if t .sp .5
.\" ..
.\" \" - Define 'example' macro
.\" \" 
.\" \" NOTE: Please adjust .TH date whenever modifying the manpage.
.\" \" 
.\" \" 
.\" 
.TH "IPRAYTIME" "1" "May 1, 2010" "ipraytime" "User Commands"
.SH "NAME"
ipraytime \- An Islamic Prayer Times Calculator
.\"
.SH "SYNOPSIS"
.B ipraytime
.RB [ \-\-date
.RI           yyyymmdd ]
.RB [ \-\-latitude
.RI              real_num ]
.RB [ \-\-longitude
.RI              real_num ]
.RB [ \-\-utcdiff
.RI              real_num ]
.RB [ \-\-method
.RI             int_num ]
.RB [ \-\-ishaangle
.RI              real_num ]
.RB [ \-\-fajrangle
.RI              real_num ]
.RB [ \-\-dst
.RI             int_num ]
.RB [ \-\-dst\-start
.RI             yyyymmdd ]
.RB [ \-\-dst\-end
.RI             yyyymmdd ]
.RB [ \-\-round
.RI             int_num ]
.RB [ \-\-extreme
.RI             int_num ]
.RB [ \-\-sea\-level
.RI             int_num ]
.RB [ \-\-month
.RI            [int_num] ]
.RB [ \-\-year
.RI           [int_num] ]
.RB [ \-\-file
.RI           pref_file ]
.RB [ \-\-end ]
.RB [ \-\-brief ]
.RB [ \-\-help ]
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
\fBipraytime\fR is a generator of Islamic prayer times for any given
location. It is capable of generating daily, monthly, and yearly
schedules based on user specified settings. In its single day output
format, it can calculate the appropriate Qibla direction (heading
towards the Kabaa) and Imsaak time (the time when one is to start
fasting). \fBipraytime\fR also has a minimalistic option to show a
brief one\-liner showing prayer times for a single day.
.PP 

\fBipraytime\fR is configured using a file in the user's home
directory (\fI~/.iprayrc\fR). For configuration and usage samples, see
the \fBEXAMPLES\fR section below. It is also possible to specify
settings using an environment variable (IPT_DATA) or through passing
arguments to the command line (which takes precedent over all other
settings). If none of the above is found, \fBipraytime\fR defaults to
using Makkah's location with the host machine's current date settings.
.SH "OPTIONS"
A summary of all command\-line arguments and configuration options are
noted below:
.TP 
.B \-h, \-\-help
Show summary of options.
.TP 
.B \-d, \-\-date \fIyyyymmdd\fR
Specify the Gregorian date to use where `y' stands for
year, `m' for month and `d' for day.
.TP 
.B \-lat, \-\-latitude \fIreal_num\fR
Specify the latitude setting to use during calculations.  The value
could be any real number.
.TP 
.B \-lon, \-\-longitude \fIreal_num\fR
Specify the longitude setting to use during calculations.  The value
could be any real number.
.TP 
.B \-sea, \-\-sea\-level \fIreal_num\fR
Specify height above Sea level (in meters).
.TP 
.B \-u, \-\-utcdiff \fIreal_num\fR
Specify the difference between the specified timezone and that of GMT/UTC.
The value could be any real number.
.TP 
.B \-a, \-\-anglemethod \fI[int_num]\fR
Specify which angle method calculation to use.  The angle methods that are
currently supported by \fIipraytime\fR are,
.RS 8
.TP 4
.B 1
Egyptian General Authority of Survey
  Fajr/Isha Angle   : 20/18
  Used in           : Africa, Indonesia, Iraq, 
                      Jordan, Lebanon, Malaysia,
                      Singapore, Syria,
                      Parts of the USA
.TP 4
.B 2
University of Islamic Sciences, Karachi (Shaf'i)
  Fajr/Isha Angle   : 18/18
  Used in           : Iran, Kuwait,
                      Parts of Europe
.TP 4
.B 3
University of Islamic Sciences, Karachi (Hanafi)
  Fajr/Isha Angle   : 18/18
  Used in           : Afghanistan, Bangladesh,
                      India
.TP 4
.B 4
Islamic Society of North America
  Fajr/Isha  Angle  : 15/15
  Used in           : Canada, Parts of UK,
                      Parts of USA
.TP 4
.B 5
Muslim World League (MWL)
  Fajr/Isha  Angle  : 18/17
  Used in           : Parts of Europe,
                      Far East, Parts of USA
.TP 4
.B 6
Umm Al\-Qurra University
  Fajr/Isha Angl e  : 19/0
  Isha Interval     : 90 minutes from Al\-Maghrib
                      prayer but set to 120
                      during Ramadan.
  Used in           : Saudi Arabia
.TP 4
.B 7
Fixed Isha Angle Interval (always 90)
  Fajr/Isha Angle   : 19.5/0
  Isha Interval     : 90 minutes from Al\-Maghrib
                      prayer
  Used in           : Bahrain, Oman, Qatar, UAE
.TP 4
.B 8
Egyptian General Authority of Survey (Egypt)
  Fajr/Isha Angle   : 19.5/17.5
  Used in           : Egypt
.RE
.TP
.B \-fa, \-\-fajrangle \fI[real_num]\fR
Specify which angle to use for Fajr. Will override the one set by the \-\-anglemethod.
.TP
.B \-ia, \-\-ishaangle \fI[real_num]\fR
Specify which angle to use for Isha. Will override the one set by the \-\-anglemethod.
.TP
.B \-s, \-\-dst \fI[int_num]\fR
By default, \fBipraytime\fR uses the host's machine timezone
information to determine whether daylight saving time is in effect or
not. If this information is unavailable or not accurate, this option
provides the means to explicitly set the DST status. Set this to 0 to
completely disable daylight saving time. Set it to 1 to always add one
hour to the computed prayer times.
.PP 
.B \-ss, \-\-dst\-start  \fIyyyymmdd\fR
.br 
.B \-se, \-\-dst\-end  \fIyyyymmdd\fR 
.br 
.RS
Specify a range of dates where day light saving time is in effect for
your location. For example:
.RE
.RS 12
.TP 4
ipraytime \-\-dst\-start 20040328 \-\-dst\-end 20041029
.RE
.TP 
.B \-m, \-\-month \fI[int_num]\fR
Specify to print either current month's schedule or the passed\-in value's
month schedule.
.TP 
.B \-y, \-\-year \fI[int_num]\fR
Specify to print either current year's schedule or the passed\-in value's
year schedule.
.TP 
.B \-f, \-\-file \fIpref_file\fR
Specify filename to load which contains user's settings and preferences.
.TP 
.B \-e, \-\-end
Specify to continue with schedule printing until the end of specified month.
.TP 
.B \-b, \-\-brief
Specify to print a brief one\-liner output for single day mode.
.TP 
.B \-h12,  \-\-regular\-hour
Display the prayer times in regular time instead of military time.
.TP 
.B \-r, \-\-round \fI[int_num]\fR
Specify a method for rounding seconds. The supported methods are,
.RS 8
.TP 4
.B 0
No Rounding. Completely ignore the computed seconds value.
.TP 4
.B 1
Regular Rounding. If seconds are equal to 30 or above, add 1 minute.
.TP 4
.B 2
Special Rounding. Similar to regular rounding but we always round down
for Shurooq and Imsaak times. (This is the default method).
.TP 4
.B 3
Aggressive Rounding. Similar to Special Rounding but we add 1 minute
if the seconds value are equal to 1 second or more.
.RE
.TP 
.B \-x, \-\-extreme \fI[int_num]\fR
Specify a method for prayer times calculations at high (49+) or
extreme (66+) latitudes. Prayer times calculations relies heavily on
astronomical events. At these latitudes some of those events do not
occur at all, or are impossible to precisely calculate using
conventional means. For example, at certain locations the sun never
moves below the horizon to the position of the amount of Fajr angle
degrees specified, therefore there will be no real Fajr time at that
location. The supported extreme methods are:
.RS 8
.PP 5
.B Note:
Methods that have the \fBIf Invalid\fR keyword are applied only when
\fBipraytime\fR is unable to calculate these times. Methods that have the
\fBAlways\fR keyword are applied always.
.TP 4
.B 0
None. If unable to calculate, leave as 99:99
.TP 4
.B 1
Nearest Latitude (Aqrab Al\-Bilaad): All prayers [Always]
.TP 4
.B 2
Nearest Latitude (Aqrab Al\-Bilaad): Fajr and Isha [Always]
.TP 4
.B 3
Nearest Latitude (Aqrab Al\-Bilaad):  All prayers [If Invalid]
.TP 4
.B 4
Nearest Good Day (Aqrab Al\-Ayyam): All prayers [Always]
.TP 4
.B 5
Nearest Good Day (Aqrab Al\-Ayyam): All prayers [If Invalid] (This is
the default method)
.PP 4
.B Note: 
All the extreme methods following below do not have a proof in
traditional Shari'a (Fiqh) resources. These methods were introduced by
modern day Muslim scholars and scientists for practical reasons only.
.TP 4
.B 6
Seventh of Night: Fajr and Isha [Always]
.TP 4
.B 7
Seventh of Night: Fajr and Isha [If Invalid]
.TP 4
.B 8
Seventh of Day: Fajr and Isha [Always]
.TP 4
.B 9
Seventh of Day: Fajr and Isha [If Invalid]
.TP 4
.B 10
Half of the Night: Fajr and Isha [Always]
.TP 4
.B 11
Half of the Night: Fajr and Isha [If Invalid]
.PP 4
.B Note: 
To use the next two methods, you will need to specify \fBFajrInterval\fR and
\fBIshaInterval\fR in your configuration file.
.TP 4
.B 12
Minutes from Shorooq/Maghrib: Fajr and Isha [Always]
.TP 4
.B 13
Minutes from Shorooq/Maghrib: Fajr and Isha [If invalid]
.RE
.SH "CONFIGURATION"
\fBipraytime\fR is capable of loading settings from a configuration
file (\fI~/.iprayrc\fR). The default location of the configuration
file can be changed using the \-\-file option. The content of the file
should be in the following syntax `variable_string: value'. See the
\fBEXAMPLES\fR section for usage examples. Below is a list of all the
supported settings which can be used in the configuration file:
.SS "Location Settings"
.TP 2
.B City
Specifies an informational city name string to be displayed for reference.
.TP 2
.B Latitude
Specify the latitude setting to use during calculations.  The value
could be any real number.
.TP 2
.B Longitude
Specify the longitude setting to use during calculations.  The value
could be any real number.
.TP 2
.B UTC
Specify the difference between the specified timezone and that of GMT/UTC.
The value could be any real number.
.TP 2
.B SeaLevel
Specify height above Sea level (in meters).
.TP 2
.B Pressure
Specify the atmospheric pressure in millibars. The default value is 1010. 
.TP 2
.B Temperature
Specify the temperature in Celsius degree. The default value is 10.
.SS "Calculation Method Settings"
.TP 2
.B AngleMethod
Specify which angle method calculation to use.  The value needs to be
a positive integer of one of the supported methods. See the
\-\-anglemethod option for more information.
.TP 2
.B Mathhab
Specify which mathhab to use in one's calculations.  The current
supported value are 1 for Shaf'i and 2 for Hanafi.
.TP 2
.B OffsetList
Specify a list of values in minutes to add or subtract any amount of
minutes from the daily computed prayer times. For example, If you want
to add 30 seconds to Maghrib and subtract 2 minutes from Isha, you
will set this option to `0 0 0 0 0.5 \-2'.
.TP 2
.B FajrAngle
Specify the fajr angle to use during calculations. Will override the
values of the specified method.
.TP 2
.B IshaAngle
Specify the isha angle to use during calculations. Will override the
values of the specified method.
.TP 2
.B ImsaakAngle
Specify imsaak and fajr angle difference. The default value is 1.5 degrees.
.TP 2
.B FajrInterval
Specify the number of minutes between fajr and shorooq. This should be
a positive integer.
.TP 2
.B IshaInterval
Specify the number of minutes between Isha and Maghrib. This should be
a positive integer.
.TP 2
.B ImsaakInterval
Specify a difference in minutes between imsaak and fajr. The default
Imsaak interval from fajr is 10 minutes if the FajrInterval is set.
.TP 2
.B ExtremeMethod
Specify which method to use for high and extreme latitudes.  The value
needs to be an integer of one of the supported extreme methods. See
descriptions of the \-\-extreme option for a list of the supported
methods.
.TP 2
.B NearestLatitude
Specify the latitude Used for the `Nearest Latitude' extreme
methods. The default is at 48.5 degrees.
.TP 2
.B RoundMethod
Specify which method to use for rounding seconds. The value needs to
be an integer of one of the supported rounding methods.  See
the \-\-round option for a list of the supported methods.
.SS "Daylight Saving Time Settings"
By default, \fBipraytime\fR uses the host's machine timezone
information to determine whether daylight saving time is in effect or
not. If this information is unavailable or not accurate, these options
provide the means to explicitly set the DST status.
.TP 2
.B DST
Specify the current DST status. Set this to 0 to completely disable
daylight saving time. Set it to 1 to always add one hour to the
computed prayer times.
.TP 2
.B DST\-Start
Specify the start date when daylight saving time adjustment is in
effect for your location. This value should be a valid date in yyyymmdd
form.
.TP 2
.B DST\-End
Specify the date when daylight saving time adjustment period
ends. This value should be a valid date in yyyymmdd form.
.SS "Display Settings"
.TP 2
.B HourFormat
Specify a time format for displaying the prayer times. The value should
be 12 (regular time) or 24 (military time).
.SH "ENVIRONMENT"
.TP 10
.B IPT_DATA
One means to pass\-in the various required settings is via this variable.
The format of the variable needs to be "LocationName Latitude Longitude
UTCdiff AngleMethodNumber". For instance,
.EX
setenv IPT_DATA "Dubai 25.25 55.3 4 2"
.SH FILES
.I ~/.iprayrc
User configuration file.
.SH "EXAMPLES"
.TP 4
A sample (\fB~/.iprayrc\fR) showing how options are set:
.nf

City: Brussels, Belguim
Latitude: 50.8333
Longitude: 4.3333
UTC: 1
AngleMethod: 2
Mathhab: 1
OffsetList: 0 0 1 2.21 3 \-1
.fi
.TP 4
Examples of using the command\-line options:
.nf

ipraytime \-y 2007

ipraytime \-f /home/user/.iprayrc\-Oman

ipraytime \-lat 29.5000 \-lon 47.7500 \-u 3 \-\-anglemethod 2 \-d 20071229 \-h12

.fi
.SH "REPORTING BUGS"
Report bugs on the web using http://bugs.arabeyes.org
.SH "AUTHORS"
Written by Nadim Shaikli and Thamer Mahmoud. Part of the
Arabeyes.org project.
.SH "COPYRIGHT"
\fBipraytime\fR is subject to the GNU General Public License (GPL).
.br 
Copyright \(co 2005, Arabeyes, Nadim Shaikli.
.br
Copyright \(co 2005\-2010 Thamer Mahmoud

.SH "SEE ALSO"
\fBireminder\fR(1) \- Prayer time reminder script that uses \fBipraytime\fR.
\" .BR libitl (1).
.PP 
The ITL library (libitl) from the Islamic Tools and Libraries project.
It is the underlying requirement for \fBipraytime\fR to function.  The
ITL library was created and is hosted at \fBwww.arabeyes.org\fR.
