.\" -*- nroff -*-
.\" $Id: ireminder.1 11579 2010-05-06 13:59:19Z thamer $
.\"
.\" NOTE: Please adjust .TH date whenever modifying the manpage.
.\"
.TH IREMINDER "1" "May 01, 2010" "ireminder" "User Commands"
.\"
.SH NAME
ireminder \- Prayer time reminder
.\"
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ireminder
.RB [ \-ipraytime
.RI     path]
.RB [ \-skip
.RI     event_name]
.RB [ \-reminder
.RI     minutes]
.RB [ \-inplace]
.RB [ \-execr
.RI     cmd]
.RB [ \-execs
.RI     cmd]
.RB [ \-help]
.SH DESCRIPTION
The \fBireminder\fR script is written in perl and is meant to be a simplistic
wrapper to call and process the 'ipraytime' application.  \fBireminder\fR is
used to remind the user via audio indicators of an impending Islamic prayer
event.
.SH OPTIONS
Some of the options within \fBireminder\fR allow for list inputs, those
are meant to be a quoted series of text/numbers.
.TP
.B \-ipraytime \fIpath\fR
Specify the path to the ipraytime executable.  Unless this options is
specified, the script will default to look for the binary in /usr/bin,
/usr/local/bin and the current directory.
.TP
.B \-skip \fIevent_name\fR
Specify name of prayer/event to skip, valid options include "imsaak
fajr shorooq zuhr asr maghrib isha" (list ok).
.TP
.B \-reminder \fIminutes\fR
Specify prior to how many minutes to remind (list ok).
.TP
.B \-inplace
Specify to print output in-place (without scrolling).
.TP
.B \-execr \fIcmd\fR
Specify an external application trigger for reminders.  The %m
directive is recognized and is substituted with the normal output
message or string.  The %s directive is recognized and is
substituted by the salat's name.
.TP
.B \-execs \fIcmd\fR
Specify an external application trigger for when the salat reaches
its appointed time (ie. "salat now").  The %m directive is
recognized and is substituted with the normal output message or
string.  The %s directive is recognized and is substituted by the
salat's name.
.TP
.B \-help
Produce a help screen.
.SH "EXAMPLES"
.TP 4
Here is an example of using \fBireminder\fR to display a message prayer time, ignoring imsaak and shorooq:
.nf

ireminder \-skip "imsaak shorooq" \-execs "notify\-send \-t 1000000 \\"Ireminder\\" \\"It is time for %s.\\"" &

.TP 4
Another Example:
.nf

ireminder -execr "xmessage %m" -execs "xmessage %m"

.fi
.SH REPORTING BUGS
Report bugs on the web using http://bugs.arabeyes.org
.SH AUTHOR
Written by Nadim Shaikli as part of the Arabeyes.org project.
.SH COPYRIGHT
\fBiremidner\fR is subject to the GNU General Public License (GPL).
.br
Copyright \(co 2006, Arabeyes, Nadim Shaikli.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
\fBipraytime(1) \- The underlying prayer times calculator used \fBiremidner\fR.
.PP
The ITL library (libitl) from the Islamic Tools and Libraries project.
It is the underlying requirement for \fBireminder\fR to function.  The
ITL library was created and is hosted at \fBwww.arabeyes.org\fR.
